Review Article
Frances Yates and the Writingo f History
Brian Vickers
Harvard University
The publication of Frances Yates's study, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment, 1
has raised a number of important issues concerning the writing of Renais-
sance history, the history of ideas, the history of science, and the history of
politics and monarchies. With the last of these-her accounts of Frederick
V of the Palatinate, the court of Rudolph II, the outbreak of the Thirty
Years' War-I shall have nothing to do and await the findings of the
historians.2 Setting aside these matters still leaves much to discuss: the
1 Frances Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment( London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1972), pp. 269. All numbers in parentheses refert o this book.
2 The roll call of British historians who welcomed the original publication is
remarkable: Christopher Hill (New York Review of Books [October 4, 19731, pp.
23-24: ' Its excitement is gloriously infectious, its scope is breath-taking"); John
Kenyon (Observer [January 28, 1973]); Sir Isaiah Berlin (Observer [December
16, 1973]: "A magnificentw ork of imaginationa nd learningb y a great scholar"); Joel
Hurstfield( Times [February 1, 1973]: "so eminent a scholar, . . . the truth, so
skillfullyu nravelled"); Asa Briggs (New Scientist [November 23, 1972]: "brilliant
analysis . . . compulsive reading"); J. H. Elliott (New Statesman [January2 6, 1973]:
"A brilliantb ook, writtenw ith an intellectualp ower and a verve which are likely to
leave a deep impression on all those who are fortunatee nough to fall under its
spell"). Hugh Trevor-Roper went to the unusual lengtho f reviewingi t twice: in the
Sunday Times (December 17, 1972): "A brillianta nd exciting book . . . delicate
scholarship and a profounds tudy of symbolism," and in Listener (January 18, 1973):
"A major work . . . exact scholarshipa ddressed to historicald etail." Other favorable
reviews came from Frederick Coplestone (Spectator [January2 0, 1973]), Lisa Jardine
(Tablet [February 24, 19731), Anthony Powell (Daily Telegraph [December 21,
1972]), and Colin Wilson (Books and Bookmen [January 1973]: "A really scholarly
book . . . a model of how such a book should be written,' and BritishB ook News
[May 19731: 'learned, original and exciting"). Among the historianso f science and
philosophy there was less unanimity: Charles G. Nauert noted that much of the
evidence was vague or nonexistent but found it "a significantc ontributiont o the
world of learning" (Renaissance Quarterlv 28 [1975]: 366-67); C. A. Ronan, while
pointingo ut that the new experimentals cience of the Royal Society was "something
quite differenft romt he mystical-magicalR osicrucian approach," declared it "another
importantc ontributiont o our understandingo f Renaissance thinking" (Annals of
Science 31 [1974]: 85-86). Less impressed were P. F. Corbin in Modern Language
ReviewR6 9 (January 1974): 149-51: "Though there is much in her thesis which is
stimulatingi t cannot be accepted as proven," the evidence is "circumstantialo r
speculative," "inconclusive," and "a sense of context" is often lacking; and the
anonymous reviewer in the Times LiteraryS upplement of April 20, 1973 who pointed
out some crucial weaknesses in the historical sections: "A major disappointment,
lacking the solid basis of research normallya ssociated with its author . . . in some
[Journal of Modern Historyv5 1 (June 1979): 287-3161
? 1979 by The Universityo f Chicago. 0022-2801/79/5102-0033$02.28
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
288 Review Article
genesiso f the Rosicrucian" movement,"' its influencei,t s significancfeo r
the Renaissancei n general,a nd the developmenotf science in particular.
Almosta s importanats thec onclusionso f Yates's book are the methodsb y
whiche videncei s treatedi n ordert o producet hese conclusions.
The Rosicrucianm ovementis an extraordinareyp isode in the troubled
historyo f the earlys eventeenthce nturyW. e do not knoww hethers uch a
"fraternitye"v er existed,a nd Yates is carefult o say that she does not
know either( pp. xiv, 206-7). Our only evidence for its compositionis
literaryb, eing containedi n two anonymousp amphletsf irstp ublisheda t
Cassel in 1614 and 1615. These are ratherb riefp roductionst,h e first(o r
Fama, to use Yates's shortt itle)a mountintgo fourteenp ages in a modern
translatio(np p. 238-51),t he second (or Confessio) amiountintgo ninep ages
(pp. 251-60). They describet he foundationan d constitutioonf a groupo f
initiatesw ho devote theirl ives to the studyo f the occult and to the twin
ends of praisingG od and helpingm ankind.T hey practicea lchemyb ut
bitterlyd enouncef alse alchemistsw ho are greedya nd fraudulentT. hey
practicem edicinea nd criticizet hose doctorsw ho accept moneyf or their
work.T heirf raternitisy idealistic,p hilanthropiTc.h eird octrineb elongst o
the broad stream of Renaissance occultism, acknowledgingE astern
influence(sa nd, nearera t hand,f indinag kindredsp iritin Paracelsus).T heir
founderi s said to have "constructeda microcosmc orrespondinign all
motionst o the macrocosm"( whatevert hatm eans) (p. 248), theyu se the
mysticalg eometryo f the Cabbalist traditions,a re adept in magic, and await
them illenniumin confidencteh att heird octrinew illb e justifiedE. veryp oint
in their manifestosc ould be illustratedm any times over froms everal
centurieso f the occult traditionN. o one familiarw itht hisl iteraturceo uld
describet heird octrinea s anythingot hert hana fairlyo rdinaryh, armless,
unobjectionablaed aptationo f familiarm aterialsY. et in Yates's handst hey
become the exemplarso f a dynamici ntellectuaml ovementw hicht ypifies
"the Renaissancem ind" and has incalculablei nfluenceo n such men as
respectsse riouslym isleading(p' p. 445-46). He also insistedo n the fundamental
differencbese tweenA ndreaea nd Dee and betweenC omeniusa nd theR osicruciansa
pointm ade againb y the Dee scholar,C . H. Jostenw, ho declaredt hat" therei s no
traceo fa nyf iliatioonf thec ontentos f thet wow orks"( Andreae'sC hyinicaWl edding
and Dee's Monas Hieroglyphica",w hicha s yetd efiesc ompletea nd certainin terpre-
tation'), concludinwg itht heh opet hat" nobodyw illt ake Dr. Yates's conjecturefso r
facts" (Ambix2 0 [1973]: 132-33).C harlesW ebsterb rieflyn otedt hat" the evidence
remaints otallyu nconvincingt,"h ec onnectionasr gueda re "contestable.. . question-
able," while the work of Andreae Comenius,a nd Bacon is quite remotef rom
Rosicrucianismw, hich "itself never occupied more than the extremef ringeo f
Europeant hought,a"n d in England" was neverm oret hana n eccentrica nd periph-
eral phenomeno(nE'n glishH istoricalR eview8 9 [April1 974]:4 34-35). A. J. Turner
(BritishJ ournlaf or the Historyo f Science 6 [1972-73]:4 42-44)f oundt heb ook "not
veryc onvincing,"s ince despitem uch speculation" the evidencef ails too often"
especiallyf or the claims of influenceb y Dee on Khunratha nd on the whole
",movement.T" urnerr emains" unconvincedt hatt he Rosicrucianm anifestows ere
anythinmg oret hana literaryex ercisei n a mysticagl enre,"d rawingo n the occult
tradition'w, hich gave expressiont o an idealistica nd fantastipcr ogrammoef political
wish-fulfillmeenntt,i relyla ckinga basis in politicalr eality."
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
Review Article 289
Francis Bacon, Comenius, Descartes, Kepler, Newton, and the whole of
the Royal Society. It becomes "a whole culture," whose ruthless suppres-
sion by the forces of orthodoxym arks a tragic closure of a movementw hose
potentialc an only be described as the equal of the Enlightenment.H ow is
this imposing picture built up?
In part it is a triumpho f rhetoric. Yates invests all her writing,w hether
historical description or philosophical analysis, with an excitement which
will take many readers along with it. Prague under Rudolph II was "a
meltingp ot of ideas, mysteriouslye xciting in its potentialityf or new devel-
opments" (p. 17); Bohemia is a world "seething with strange excitements"'
(p. 28); "The strangelye xciting suggestion" is that John Dee inspired "the
Rosicrucian movement" (p. 40); intense excitement" was "aroused by the
Fama" (p. 45); the mechanical statues at Heidelberg were "enough to
excite amazement" (p. 59). Around Frederick "deep currents were swirl-
ing," while "all the mysterious movements of former years . . . were
gathered to a head" in the propaganda for him (p. 90). John Dee had a
''strange, explosive, religious mission" in Bohemia, perhaps affected by
"the new Lurianic Cabala which was capable of exciting remarkable phe-
nomena of a religious nature" (p. 228). And so on. The rhetoric of
excitement, though, will not affect the reader if he is unsatisfiedb y the
argumenta nd its serious claims for the importance and significanceo f all
these phenomena. Here we must record a defeat of logic, demonstratedi n a
numbero f ways. Yates states that her book attempts "to provide a histori-
cal frameworkf or this line of thinking,a nd it is as a historicalw ork that I
would wish it to be judged" (p. 221; cf. pp. xiii, 201). As such, then, it must
be judged.
If the historianh as a prime concern it must be with the meaning ot his
documents. In addition to the normal respect for semantics he must faith-
fully reconstructt he context in which a particular judgment is made. A
simple example of both processes is Yates's treatmento f Johann Valentin
Andreae and his use of the word ludibriurn. Andreae (born 1586) was a
Lutheran pastor from Wuirttemberwg ho published anonymously in 1616 a
work called Chymische Hochzeit ChristianiR osencreutz. Anno 1459 (Stras-
burg). Yates shows that it is based on the age-old alchemical use of mariiage
as a symbolf or the chemical process and alludes to the Rosicrucians insofar
as the name of its chief character is ChristianR osencreutz, who experiences
a religious vision involvinga banquet, a castle presided over by a King and
Queen, with various mysticale xperiences (pp. 60-64). When I firstr ead her
book I was skeptical of Yates's claim that this work "ranks almost as a
thirdR osicrucian manifesto" (p. 50). By page 65 this claim has become that
it is but another version of the allegories of the Fama and the Confessio."
To me it seemed to have a quite differental legorical structure( based on the
six days of Creation) and to be a form of glamorous rhapsody about
alchemy (in a chivalric setting)w hich makes opportunisticu se of the recent
Rosicrucian publications. The publication shortlya fterwardo f an authorita-
tive two-volume study of Andreae by J. W. Montgomeryc onfirmedt hat
skepticism was the right response.3 Montgomery adds to his previous
3 John Warwick MontgomeryC, ross and Crucible. Johann ValentinA ntdreae
(1586-1654).P hoenixo f the Theologians,2 vols. (The Hague, 1973),v ol. 1. An-
dreae's Life, World-Viewan, d Relationsw ithR osicrucianisman d Alchemyv, ol. 2,
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
290 Review Article
studieso f sixteentha-n d seventeenth-centuLruyt heranisma detailedb iog-
raphyo f Andreaef romp ublisheda nd manuscripsto urces, a studyo f his
scientifiacn d religiousa ttitudes,a commentede ditiono f the Chvmische
Hochzeit, and a fullya nnotatedb ibliographyof Andreae, primarya nd
secondary.T he range and accuracyo f his scholarshipis impressiven, ot
least in the way he exposes the inaccuraciesa nd confusionso f the French
historiano f RosicrucianismP,a ul Arnold,o n whomY ates reliess o heavily
and uncritically.
The significancoef Montgomeryb'so ok, brieflyi,s its demonstratiotnh at
Andreaew as "thec hiefo rthodoxo pponento f the Rosicrucianid eology(n ot
a supporteorf it,p ace mosti nterpreters()p" . ix). Montgomersyh owst hat
there is no evidence for Andreae's authorshipo f the two Rosicrucian
pamphletasn d overwhelminegv idenceo f his lifelongan tipathyto cabalism,
astrologym, agic,a nd otherf ormso f the occult. Andreaew as an orthodox
Lutheranp astora nd theologianw ho triedt o put his ideals intop racticeb y
organizingC hristians ocieties,n oted for theirs eriousd iscussiona nd their
practicasl pirito f mutuala id, and by writingva riousp amphletasd vocatinga
Christianr eformo f society. His Christianopoli(s1 619) is a utopia which
perfectlyex presses Andreae's humanitariabne nt and his completea ccep-
tance of the "fundamental theological approach of confessional
Lutheranism"(p . 127). The religiousf rameworkis centralt o Andreae;
indeed,h e "never wrotea non-theologicawl ork" (p. 55). Althoughs ome
friendso f Andreaeh ad occult leanings,M ontgomereya sily demolishest he
"Guilt by Association"t echniqueu sed to align Andreaew itht he occult
throught hem.
Yet Andreaed id publishi n 1616 the ChvmicalW edding,i n whicht he
main characteri s ChristianR osencreutz,t he supposed foundero f the
Rosicrucians ect. The worki tselfh as verys lenderp arallelsw itht he Rosi-
crucianl iteratur(ep p. 171-72) and substantiadl ivergences(p p. 225-30)-
differencesso fundamentatlh ato ne criticc oncludedt hati ts purposew as
"to ridiculet he Rosicrucianm yth,"a nd Montgomeryh imselfn otes that
some aspects of it "seem in part to be a directs lap" at the Rosicrucian
"The ChvmischeH ochzeit,"w ithN otes and Commentary,g"i vinga barelyl egible
facsimileo f the 1690E nglisht ranslatiobny Ezechiel Foxcrofwt ithd etailedc ommen-
tary.C ross-referenbceet weenM ontgomeryb'so ok and Yates's can be veryi lluminat-
ing. Thus Yates attemptst o link Andreaew itha nothero ccultist,S imon Studion,
authoro f a complexa strologico-chiliaswtiocr k,N aometria.S he writest hatA ndreae
"undoubtedlykn ewt heN aometriaf orh e mentionist in his workT urrisB abel," but
reportso nlyt hat" Andreaei s veryo bscurei n whath e says aboutt he prophecieso f
Naometriaw, hichh e linksw itht hoseo f the AbbotJ oachimS, t. Brigid,L ichtenberg,
Paracelsus,P ostel,a nd otheri lluminati("p . 50). This of coursei mpliest hatA ndreae
is perhapss ympathetipc,e rhapsa ffectedb y the same mentalityb,u t is certainlyn ot
hostile.I f one turnst o Montgomeryb'so ok, however,o ne findsa clear accounto f
Naometrianismw, hich is shown to belong to the same occult traditiona s Rosi-
crucianism(M ontgomeryp,p . 202-6), but also a summaryo f Andreae's written
judgmento n this system,w hich is "unqualifiedlyn egative" in his drama Turbo
(1616-the yearo f his ChymicalW edding)i,n whichi ts followerasr e lampooned.A s
for TurrisB abel, farf romb eingo bscure,t he fifthd ialoguei s devotede xpresslyt o
Naometrianismw,h osea strologicaaln d cabalisticp retensionasr e dismissed": I would
denyn othingto heaven,b ut I am enrageda t you who reads lies intot he heavens"
(Montgomeryp,p . 206-7). Yates seems reluctantto give her readerst he trutha bout
criticismo f the occult.
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
Review Article 291
manifesto(sp . 227). Why,t hen,d id Andreaet ake over the name Rosen-
creutza nd even includeh is putatived ateo f birth1, 378,i n a cryptogra(mpp .
171-72)? Montgomerya'sn sweri s thath e was attemptintgo supplantt he
occultn atureo f the Rosicrucianm anifestosw, itht heir" anti-papalc,a balis-
tic, astrologicacl hiliasm"( p. 169), by a Christianal legory.R osencreutzis
no longera Mage who abandonsh is pilgrimagteo the birthplacoef Chris-
tianitya,c quiress ecretk nowledgef romt he East withw hichh e establishes
an esotericf raternitiyn the West whicha waits the apocalyptice nd of the
world. Now he is a 'Christian Everyman' who receives God's grace
"throught he invitationto attendt he spirituaml arriageo f Christa nd the
Church"( p. 228). Montgomercyo ncludest hat" 'Andreaem ade Rosencreutz
the hero of the HoIchzeitn ot simplyt o satirizet he Rosicrucianm ythb, ut
primarilyt o christiatize the mvth' (p. 228).
If thatw as his goal it has to be recordedt hat Andreaef ailed creating
confusionfo rc enturiesA. lthoughh is worki s recognizabldyi fferenftr omt he
Rosicrucianm anifestosi ts firstr eaderss oon assimilatedi t to them,i t
becamet hes ourceo f furtheRr osicruciansp eculationsa,n d as earlya s 1699
Andreaew as thoughtto be the authoro f all three.R ealizationt hath is plan
had backfiredc ame bitterlyto Andreae,w ho in his autobiographicvali ta
(writtenat the end of his life but not publishedu ntil1 799) expressedh is
disgustt hat it had proved "productiveo f a brood of monstrositiesa:
ludibriumw, hichy ou mayw onderw as evaluateda nd interpretewdi ths ubtle
ingenuitbyy some people,f oolishlyen ough,i n demonstratioonf thei nanity
of the curious' (p. 37). Montgomerytr anslatest he word Iadibriuma s
""fantasy,f"o llowingA . E. Waite.4I t is a wordw hichr ecursi n Andreae's
writingsi,n his referencetso the Rosicruciansa ll of whicha re scornfualn d
dismissive.I n 1617 Andreaep ublisheda satiricald ialogue,M enippus( en-
larged in 1618), which recorded a widespread feelingo f disappointmentt hat
thes ocial reformps romisedb y the Rosicrucianhs ave notm aterializedO. ne
of the speakers asks, "Do you believe that there really are some
members-or is the whole thinga Iudibriamo n the part of curiosity-
mongers?"T he otherr epliest hath e does not know, but regretst hats o
manyp eopleh ave suffere"dt hroughu nrealizedh opes of membership.B""u t
perhapst heyd eservedt o, says the firsts peaker, 'fort heyp referresdo me
artificiaaln d strangew ay rathert hant he simplew ayo f Christ,' who can be
reached "by prayers,t ears, fasting,z eal, and spirituale xercises" (pp.
181-82).
Againstt his spuriousa nd corruptp roposal Andreaew rotea n Invitatio
FraternatisC hristii n 1617-18w hichh e describedi n his autobiographays
being expressly "ludibrio illi RosencruIcianoo pposita,' and whicho ffers
insteada Christianb rotherhoowd hichi ncludesc are of the neighbort, he
sharingo f wealth,a nd otherp racticahl umanitariasnu ggestion(sp p. 184-85).
The followingy ear Andreaep ublishedT i rrisB abel (1619) whichh as the
stibtitl"e' sive Judiciorumde FraternitatReo sacae CrucisC haos." Whereas
the Rosicrucianhs ad claimedt hatt he "generalr eformationw' ouldc ome to
all men regardlesso f language Andreaes ays thatt he effecto f theirw ork
has been to increasec haos. At the end ' Fama' is made to admitt hata ll
her wondrousc laims are worthless( p. 186). Only a year later, in De
4 See A. E. Waite, The Brotherhood(f the Rosy Cross (London, 1924) and
Montgomeryc'so mment(sp . 552).
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
292 Review Article
curiositasp ernicies yntagma(1 620), Andreaea ttackedo ccultismin general,
concludingt hat "unless I am mistakent, he ludibriumo f the Rosicrucian
fraternitiys the heart and scandal of occultismi n our time" (p. 186).
Andreaer eturnetdo the attacki n a dialogue,T heophilu(sc a. 1623),r ecord-
ing the disappointmenfte ltw hen the Rosicrucianm illenniumdi d not take
place (ibid.).
Andreae's polemic against Rosicrucianismis the producto f a serious
Christian'sse nse of outraget hat" the idea of a ChristianSo ciety" had been
appropriatebdy a groupo f charlatans-alwaysa ssumingt hatt heye xisted.
He attackedt heirs cheme and offeredc oncretem odels of what such a
societys houldb e. The ChristianaeS ocietatisi mago, discoveredb y G. H.
Turnbulli n 1944 and publishedf or the firstt ime in 1954,5d escribesa
learneds ocietyb ased on Lutheranr eformerde ligionw hichh as some simi-
laritiest o Bacon's New Atlantiss, ome to the Royal Society,a nd belongst o
an interesitn learneda cademiesw hichw as widespread-evenJ ohnE velyn
wishedt o founda lay monasteryf or retiremenatn d study.6A ndreaen ot
only drew the model but actually establisheda Societas Christianai n
1618-19,a gain explicitlya s a counteractivem easuret o Rosicrucianism.
Writintgo Duke Augustusin 1642h e describedh is efforttso founda society
"' quam fictitiaeF raternitatRiso sicruciael udibrioin dignoo pponeremus"(p .
213), and writingto Comeniusi n 1629h e recordsh ow "post famaev anae
[Comeniuss pecifies:F raternitatRiso seae] ludibriumin hoc coivimus,a nte
octenniumci rciter.. . . Scopus fuit,C HRISTUM loco suo restituere
(p. 214).
One of the strikinqgu alitieso f Andreae'sl ifei s the fusiono f theorya nd
practice,t he interconnectioonf beliefsa nd theirr ealization.H e not only
realizeda n ideal Christians ocietyb ut he gave it lastingd imensionsin his
utopia,C hristianopolisw, hich,a gain explicitlye nough,i s closed to ""im-
postorsw hof alselyc all themselveBs rotheros f the Rose Cross" buti s open
to the true Rosicrucians,n amely,p racticingC hristians(p . 240). In the
prefacet o thatw orkA ndreaep raisedh is friendW ilhelmW ense, who had
seen people confuseda nd deceivedb y the Fama and had asked, "'If these
reformsse em proper,w hyd o we not tryt hemo urselves?"I n his funeral
sermonf or Wense in 1642 Andreae recordedt hat he had strivenf or
improvemenint society" at a timew hena certaind eceitfu(lf ictitiaf) rater-
nity" had imposedi tselfu pon gulliblem inds( pp. 214-15).
It is one of the greatp aradoxeso f seventeenth-centuhriyst oryth ata man
who consistentlyth, roughouhti s life," laugheda t the Rosicrucianf ablea nd
combatedt he littlec uriosity-brotherass, "h e put it in his autobiograph(yp .
179),s houldh ave been tarredw itht heirb rush.A s we have seen, Andreae
twice dismissest hem as fictitiaa nd four times as the proponentso f a
ludibriumM. ontgomertyr anslatets he firstw orda s "deceitful,"t he second
as "fantasy,"a nd arguest hatA ndreaer egardedR osicrucianismas "fantas-
tic," not as a "jest." Yet why did he call his own ChvmicalW eddinga
ludibrium?M ontgomeryar gues that Andreae "can use the term either
5 See G. H. Turnbull",J ohannV alentinA ndreaesS ocietasC hristiana,Z"e itschriUt
fur deutscheP hilologie7 3 (1954): 407-32; 74 (1955): 151-85.
6 See John Evelyn, lettert o Robert Boyle, dated September3 , 1659, in The
CompleteW orkso f the Right HonourableR obertB ovle, 5 vols. (London. 1744),
5:397-99.
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
Review Article 293
positivelyo r negatively-positively in relationt o the Hochzeit, negativelyi n
referencet o the Rosicrucians" (p. 37, n.). This, I feel, stretchesc redibility.
All of Andreae's uses of the word seem to me pejorative: his account of the
Hochzeit, which had survived even though other works of his had perished
(as if to say that this of all should have survived!) and had spawned a brood
of monstrous and bizarre interpretations,i s not, I think, "positive":
"Superfuerunt e contra Nuptiae Chymicae, cum monstrorumf oecundo
foetu, ludibrium,q uod mireris a nonnullis aestimatum et subtili indagine
explicatum, plane futile et quod inanitatemc uriosorum prodat" (p. 37). It
may be possible to read this as modesty, or self-deprecation,r athert han as
a thoroughgoingr ecantation,b ut I find it hard to overlook a rather rueful
tone, as if in recognitiono f the responsibilityo f this work, and his own
misguideda ttemptt o out-trumpt he Rosicrucians by appropriatingt he name
of theirh ero, for givingf urtherli fe to a movementw hich he had spent much
of his life tryingt o stamp out.
Given that the word ludibrium has unusual importance in Andreae's
attitude to Rosicrucianism, it is surprisingt hat neither Montgomery nor
Yates should give the reader any wider linguisticc ontext. Looking it up in
Lewis and Short's Latin dictionary we find it glossed as "a mockery,
derision, wantonness" (cf. Lucr. 2.47; Livy 24.4.2; 30.30; Suet. Vit. 17). By
transferencei t means "A: A laughing-stock,b utt, jest, sport" (cf. Livy
1.56.9; Hor. 1.14.15; Quint. 6.1.45) and "B: A scoff, jest, sport . . .
standingj est." A standard Renaissance dictionary( Thesaurus . . . post Ro.
Stephani et aliorum . . . a Io. Mathia Gesnero . . . Lipsiae MDCCXLIX)
definesI lidibriu,na s "Res vana et deridenda,c erta talis, qua alius ludit," and
gives some interestingr eferences from Virgil (Aen. 6.75: r-apidisl udibria
i,entis," the sport of rushingw inds") and Quintilian( 1.6.32:foedissima . . .
ludibria, "the most hideous absurdities" as the Loeb translationr enders it).
At whatever level, then, the word had pejorative connotations,a nd Yates's
first reference to Andreae's ludibrium, in his judgment of his Chym ical
Wedding, glosses it as "a fiction,o r a jest, of little worth" (p. 31). But in
other places in her book the word's clearly pejorative meaning is ignored.
On page 84 it is identifiedw ith a "serious game," on page 95 it is a "joke,"
and on pages 125 and 177 it is equated with "fiction,p arable"; on page 129
it glosses the word "merrily," on page 140 it is a "play scene," on page 142
a "comedy," on page 144 it is glossed as "mystical joke," and a "myth."
Evidentlyi t has become for Yates a flexiblec oncept which can be attached
to the Rosy Cross fraternityat any convenientp oint-indeed in the index it
is even described as "word used of the Rosicrucian movement" (p. 265).
Both the contexts in Andreae's writingsa nd the dictionarye vidence would
lead one to agree with Charles Webster that the phrases involvingl udibrium
are "derisive terms."'7
The importance of determiningt he meaning of this word is that it
expresses Andreae's attitudet o Rosicrucianism. For Yates it would clearly
not do if what she presents as a major movementi n European historyw ere
dismissed as a joke or laughingstock.I n order to rehabilitatet he word, and
justifyh er thesis, she is forced to distort Andreae's actual relation to this
"furore." By a series of rhetoricalm aneuvers she gives the impressiont hat
7 CharlesW ebster,'M acaria: Samuel Hartliba nd the Great ReformationA,"c ta
Comenian2a6 (1970): 149; quoted by Yates, p. 50.
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
294 ReviewtA, rticle
he was closelyc onnectedw ithw hat she repeatedlyc alls the "movement"
(since therei s no evidence of any single author,l et alone two, one can
hardlyg ive it the cohesive and organizeds tatus of a 'movement'). To
begin with she appropriatest he Chvmical Weddingt o the Rosicrucian
'manifestos": "It is the thirdi tem in the series which launched the
Rosicrucianf uroreT. he seriesc ame out annuallyf ort hreey ears,t heF ama
in 1614,t he Confessioi n 1615,t he Weddingi n 1616" (p. 60). The factt hat
Andreae's work followedt he other two does not make it a series, the
producto f conscious planning.B ut at least this gets the sequence right,
whichs he elsewherei nverts:" The manifestoeasr e undoubtedlyre latedt o
the ChemicalW eddingt, hought heya re probablyn ot by Andreae"( p. 30).
No, the relationshipis the otherw ay round,t he Weddinga lludes to the
manifestosn, ot theyt o it; and theya re not "probably,"b ut certainlyn, ot
by Andreae.O n the nextp age Andreaei s describeda s the "propagatoro f
'Rosicrucianf' antasies"( p. 31); thep atentd ifferencebse tweent heW edding
and the manifestoasr e ignored,A ndreaei s said to have given "romantic
allegoricael xpressiont o thet hemeso f the manifestos("p . 39), and his work
is finallyto tallya ssimilatedt o the othert wo (pp. 50, 65), representin"gt he
climaxo f the Rosencreutzm yth"( p. 69).
As Yates returnst o Andreae duringt he course of her wide-ranging
narrativea,n y doubtso r reservationasb out the historicael videncef orh is
participatioanr e swepta way. "Andreae was certainlyb ehindt he scenes of
the wholem ovementto whichh e frequentlrye fersin his numerousw orks"
(p. 50; note that nothingi s said of the tone of these references)t; he
'Rosicrucianm ovement"w as connectedw itht he ElectorP alatine,a nd "its
movings pirit"w as Andreae( p. 54). Thought heF ama and Confessio" may
not be writtenb y the same hand as the Wedding''-the laws of historical
veracityc ompel that qualificationb ut seem also to permitt he following
groundlesss upposition-' the plan of the allegoriesi n all threew orksb ears
the stampo f mindsw orkingin concert,b ento n sendingo ut intot he world
theirm ytho f ChristianR osencreutz"( p. 65). The picturei s being built
up-a fantasyl,e t us remindo urselves-ofa groupo f occultistse xpressinga
sharedp rogramT. he factt hatt hea uthorshiips multiplen, ots ingle,c an now
be subtlyr estatedt o suggestc ollaborativeac tivityT. he responset o Rosi-
crucianismY, ates writes", was chieflyin replyt o theF ama and theC onfes-
sio, the authorso f which, thougho bviouslyb elongingt o the school of
Rosencreutzm ythologypr opagatedb y Andreaei n the Chemical Wedding
[notea gain how the relationb etweent hese worksh as been invertedjm, ay
have been othert han Andreaeh imselfI. do not put forwarda ny theories
aboutt he identitieosf the writerws ho mayh ave co-operatedw ithA ndreae
over the Rosencreutzp ropaganda"( p. 91). But that does not stop her
recordingot herp eople's candidates,s uch as Jungiuos r JanusG ruter(w ho,
she suggests." mightb e watchedf or clues"), howevert enuouso r linsub-
stantiatablteh ese suggestionasr e. So we read thatA ndreaei s "the person
who knew most about the Rosicrucianm anifestoes,"h e "and his circle"
beingi n contact,o pen or secret,w ithm osto f the illuininatoi f Europe (p.
137).
This whole account of Andreae as the moving spirit behind Rosi-
crucianismis based on no historicael videnceo f any kind othert han his
unhappyu se of the name ChristianR osencreutzf or a persona in the
ChmnzicaWl edding.N ot onlyi s theren o evidencef ori t, but againsti t we
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
Review Article 295
have manye xplicitc riticismosf Rosicrucianismby Andreaeh imselfH. ow
does Yates deal witht hise vidence?S he reinterpreitts: thew ordl udibrium,
for instance,i s used in a work( the ChristianM ythologyw) hichi ncludes
favorabler eferencetso the theater,s o thatt his evidence 'mustb e taken
intoa ccount" and the wordl udibriumm ustt henb e not derogatorybu t a
termo f praise( pp. 140f f.).T hat seems a self-evidentslype ciousm isuseo f
linguisticc ontext. The fact is that Andreae here dismissedt he R. C.
Brothersa s "mere players,c omedians,f rivolousa nd foolishp eople" and
theirf raternitays one that" plays,c omediest hroughouEtu rope," references
whichc an onlyb e denigratoryY.a tes's reinterpretatiaolnso takest hef orm
of givinga substantiael xcerptf romA ndreae and then in commenting,
drawinga ttentionn ott o thed erogatortyo neb utt o some othera spect.T hus
the attackb y Truthi n the ChristianM ythologyon the
'
new-fanglendo -
tions' of the Rosicrucianst hath ad been occupyingt he "literarys tage"
recentlyp, roducing" altercations., . vague hintsa nd maliciousc onjec-
tures" fromw hichs he has withdrawnh erself" utterlyt, hatI may not be
involvedi n so dubiousa nd slipperya concern- an unequivocallyco ndem-
natoryp assage-is takenb y Yates as merelys howingh ow muchA ndreae
approvedo f the theater" as good and morallyv aluable," and thath e only
dislikedo therst amperinwg itht he originalR osicrucianp lay scene (p. 143).
That seems to me a disingenuoucso mmentt, o say the least.
The mostd rastico f her reinterpretatioonfs t he Andreaee videncec on-
cernsa putativec hronologyY. ates suggestst hat Andreaeh ad earliera p-
provedo ft he Rosicrucianbs ute xperienceda suddenc hangeo fh earta round
1617." The mythw hichh e had firsta rdentlyw elcomed"n ow "seems to be
disparagedb y him as a vain 'ludibrium.I' n its place, he now urgedt he
formatioonf 'ChristianU nions, or 'ChristianS ocieties' . . . to be inspired
by aims verys imilart o thosee xpressedi n the Rosicrucianm anifestoes("p .
140). Several misinterpretatiocnons vergeh ere. First,t herei s no evidence
that Andreae had ever "ardentlyw elcomed" the Rosicrucians;s econd,
Yates does notr emindu s thats incet he ChymicaWl eddingw as publishedin
1616i t is barelya yearl atert hath e is rejectingR osicrucianismth; irdh, e-d id
not turn to Christians ocieties as an alternativet o Rosicrucianism-as
Montgomerhya s shown,t herew as a consistentC hristianh umanitarianism
throughouhti s life; and fourtht, he purposeso f Andreae's Christianso ci-
eties were not at all similart o those of the RosicruciansI.t is deceptive,
then,t o speak of Andreaei n 1617b econmin"gex tremelyan xiousa boutt he
course" of a movemenwt hichh e had earliers upported(p . 143),a nd it is
even mored eceptivet o turnh is peJorativree ferenceisn tol audatoryo nes.
The moste xtremei nstanceo f thist actico ccurs in Yates's treatmenotf
Christianopolist,h at Christians cientificu topia in the prefacet o which
Andreaed ismissedt he R. C. Fraternitays "a joke" thath ad nevertheless
produced 'confusionam ongm en . . . conflicatm ongt he learned"a nd 'an
unresta nd commotiono f impostorsa nd swindlers,"c reated by "some
society( if therer eallyi s such a one), hazy, omniscienotn lyi n the eyes of
its own boastfulness,"w ho put theiro wn "foolish ceremonies"a bove
"Him who is himselfth e Way theT ruth,a nd theL ife" (pp. 145-46).F rom
thisu nambiguoudse nunciationY ates extractsa singlea nd positivec onclu-
sion, that "accordingt o Andreae,t he furoreh as had at least this good
result,t hati t has made people thinka nd realize the need forr eform"(p .
146). If ther eadert hinkst hatc onclusionf liesi n thef ace oft hee vidence,h e
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
296 Review Article
will be morea mazed when Yates, havingc laimedt hat Andreae'sw orki s
inspiredb y "Hermetic-Cabalistm, agico-scientifitcr"e ndsi nitiatedb y Dee,
Fludd, and Campanella,c oncludest hat "Andreae is, then,r epeatingin a
disguisedf ormi n Christianopolits he secret themes of the Rosicrucian
manifestosa nd of his own Chemical Wedding.H e disguises it by his
apparentr ejectiono f Rosicruciansn, ot onlyi n the preface[ thep assagej ust
quoted]b ut also in the texto f thatw ork." She is referrintgo the sequence
wheret he guarda t the easterng ate refusese ntryt o certainl ow classes of
people, including" stage-players"a nd "impostorsw ho falselyc all them-
selves theb rotherosf the Rosicrucians."A gain,a n unequivocalr ejectiono f
this fantasy,i n line with Andreae's lifelongp ronouncementsB.u t Miss
Yates can cope: "We have to move carefullyh ere because this is an
Andreaenj oke. It is the false R. C. Brothersw ho are excluded from
Christianopolins,o tt he trueo nes" (p. 150). Quite so . . . and by the same
token,t he putativec hangeo f attitudew as also illusory.I t transpiretsh at
Andreaew as workingf or Rosicrucianismal l the time,a s a kindo f double
agent.
II
The sequenced iscussingA ndreaei s typicalo f a ratherd isturbinags pect of
Yates's work-hert reatmenotf criticso f Rosicrucianism(o r the occult,o r
magic generally).E ither she dismissest hese criticsb y castingt hem as
violente nemies or terrifiedn euroticso r, as here, she firsti gnorest he
criticismt,h eng ivesa "neutral"s ummaryof the attack,a nd finallyta kes it
merelya s prooft hata serious discussionw as goingo n. Thus a series of
ratherc austic satires on Fredericko f the Palatinatef or his presumed
associationsw itht he Rosicrucians( pp. 55 ff.) are taken in a completely
solemn manner,a s an actual account of the Fraternity'ds octrines.T o
performth is maneuvers he has had to emptyt he satireso f theirm ockery
and almosti nvertt hemi ntop anegyricsA. s she putsi t herselft,h e "satirical
and contemptuouasc count" of the movementi n these documents," if
divestedo f the satirical tone and read in a positive sense, gives an
impressionof Frederickas a religiousa nd reforminlega derw hichf itsi n well
witht he visionaryan d reformintgo neo f the Rosicrucianm anifestos("p . 58;
myi talics).O ne does not have to be a literarycr itict o perceivet hatt hisi s
an illicitm aneuver": A parodiesB 's extravaganctl aims:r emovet he parody
and you have an accuratea ccounto f B." But if you "remove" the satire
froma satire,w hat is left?L ater in the century,t his time in England,
anothers atirica ttacko n the Rosicrucianas ppeared,a pamphletd ated 1676,
fromw hich Yates quotes this announcement":T o give notice, that the
ModernG reen-ribbon'Cda ball, togetherw itht he AncientB rotherhoodof
the Rosy Cross; the HermetickA depti and the companyo f Accepted
Masons intenda ll to dine togethero n the 31 of Novembern ext. . . . [A
comic menui s thend escribeda nd those who thinko f goinga re advised to
wear spectacles] 'For otherwise' tis thoughtt he Said Societies will (as
hithertom) aket heirA ppearanceI nvisible'" (p. 211). The jest in grouping
all thesei nvisibles ecrets ocietiest ogetheris plain,b ut perhapso nly Yates
could take it as seriouse videncet hat" a wholeg roupo f esoterics ocieties"
were regardeda s havings omethingin common.
The issue is not as triviala s thatl ast examplem ights uggest.I t has long
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
Review Article 297
been knownt hatS ir Isaac Newtonw as extremelyin teresteidn alchemyb, ut
the significancoef thisi nteresth as-of course-been interpretevda riously.
To understandit we would need to knowf arm oret hanh as yet been made
clearo f Newton'sa ttitudet owardt hata ctivityH. appily,N ewtonh as leftu s
his opiniono f the Rosicruciansin his copy of Vaughan'st ranslatioonf The
Fame and Confessiono f the FraternityR .C. (1652), now in the Yale
LibraryN. ewtonh as copiedi ntot hisb ook some otheri nformatioanb outt he
Fraternitayn d ends his notew itht he followingb rusquer emark": This was
the historyo f thati mposture,"o n which,h owever,M iss Yates comments:
"This, however,n eed not necessarilyim plyc ontempti;t could merelym ean
thatN ewtonk newt hatt he Rosencreutzs toryw as a mytha, ludibrium("p .
200). Therei s a curiousc ombinatioonf qualitiesi n Yates. She is sufficiently
widelyr ead as a scholar to know of this note; she has the integrityto
publish,a nd not to suppressi t; yet she finallyin terpretist in thisp erverse
mannert, o the oppositeo f its declaredm eaninga, nd goes on to a further
rash of speculation(p p. 201-2). The dangero f thisa pproacht o historyis
thata ll the positionsa nd polaritiesc an be reversedb: lack becomesw hitei f
we divesti t of the satire,w ordsd o not meanw hatt heya ppeart o mean. If
cardiedo ut withs ufficienetn ergyt hisw ouldp roducea massivef alsification
of the evidence; and Yates's book is not withoutt races of this effect.
As a finale xampleo f thisi nversiono f negativec riticismin tot hec laimf or
thee xistenceo f positive" recognition"w e mightc onsidert he statedo pinion
of Comenius.A s we have seen withA ndreae,o ne reactiont o the Rosicru-
cians was of seriousd isappointmendte: spitet he admirableC hristianp hilan-
thropyo f the manifestotsh em illenniumha d not arrivedi,n deedn othingh ad
changed.T he R. C. Brotherhs ad failedt o appear. In The Labyrinthof the
Worlda nd theP aradise of the Heart (written1 623,p rinted1 631)C omenius
recordst hea ppearanceo f a mani n a marketplaccea llingt hep eoplet ogether
and describintgh ea ccomplishmenotfs a new groupo f sevenm enw ho know
all the secretso f naturea nd can overcomea ll humanl imitationTs.h e people
are delightedt o thinkt hatt heyc ould now "withoute rror,k nowe verything
. . . livef ors everalh undredy earsw ithousti cknessa nd greyh air,i ft heyo nly
wished it" (p. 163). Hopes grow enormouslya nd each man desires to
partake,e ach writesh is petitiont o be receivedi nto the group,b ut each
petition" was returnedw ithouta n answer;a nd theirj oyfulh ope was turned
to grief"( ibid.). The disappointmenwta s so greatt hatm en "ran fromo ne
regiono f thee artht o anotherl,a mentintgh eirm isfortunteh att heyc ouldn ot
findt hese happym en" (p. 164).
But thena nothert rumpecta lled,a notherm an appeared,s ellingh is wares
fromt he Rosicrucians": Now everythintgh atw as sold was wrappedu p in
boxes thatw ere painteda nd had variousp rettyin scriptionss,u ch as Portae
Sapientiae; FortalitiumG; ymnasiumU niversitatisB; onum Macro-micro-
cosmicon;H armoniau triusqueC osmi; Christiano-Cabalisticum(ib"i d.), and
so on. All who purchasedw ere forbiddent o open theirb oxes because
otherwiset he "secret wisdom" in it "would evaporatea nd vanish." But
some mend id, and "findingth emq uitee mptys, howedt hist o others." All,
incensed,c ried "Fraud!" to the salesman,w ho managedt o calm themb y
saying that the magic objects were really there but that "they were
invisiblet o all but 'Filiae scientiae'( thati s, the sons of science)" . . . (p.
164).T he fussd ied down,t he salesmanw enta way,a nd the peoplew ho had
sought these mysteriesw ere "sittingi n corners with locked mouths."
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
298 Review Article
Comenius'sp ilgrimn, arratinagl l this,d rawst wo conclusions:" Eithert hey
had been admittedt o the mysterie(sa s some believedo f them),a nd were
obligedt o carryo ut theiro ath of silence,o r (as it seemed to me, looking
withouta ny spectacles) they were ashamed of theirh opes and ot their
uselesslye xpendedl abour" (p. 165). The pilgrima sks his guide whether
nothingw ill come of all theirh opes and receivest he unsatisfyinagn swer
thatp erhapss omethinwg ill come ifo ne waits,f orp erhapst hesem enk now
the timew hen it will happen. But the pilgrimr efusest o "continueg aping
here" since he does not know "of a singlee xample of one [man] who
succeeded": "Let us proceed hence."
To ther eaderw ho knowsa nythinogf millenariamn ovementtsh isp assage
has a familiarr ing.T hose who have faitht hatt he timew ill come can be
patienta, cceptinga ll difficultietsh; ose who do not believea re alwayst orn
by the suspiciont hat it is all a hoax, a case of "impostureh eld up by
credulity''-inB acon's strikingp hrase-thatt he whole operationh as been
performebdy a mountebankB. ut whati s Comenius'so wn attitude?Y ates
arguest hatt he specifica llusionst o Rosicruciant extss how that" the young
Comeniush ad evidentlyst eepedh imselfin all thisl iteraturea,n d had hoped
form uchf romi t," but was thend isappointed(p p. 165-66).Y et it seems to
me thatt he passage is writtenf romt he outside,w ithouta ny sense that
"Comenius" (or the Narrator)h ad ever been a would-bem embero f the
group.W hat we are giveni s a view of otherm en's hopes and credulities,
possiblys atisfiedb, ut-it seems to the Pilgrim--ashamedo f theirh opes
and of theiru selessly expended labour." I see no groundsf or Yates's
literalistin terpretatioonf this passage as autobiographye,s tablishingth at
Comeniusw as a "follower" of Andreae; nor, even less, do I see that
Comenius'sf inalv isiono f angels protectintgh e chosen has anythingto do
with "Hermetic-CabalisCt hristiana ngelology"( p. 169). What I do find
strikinign a numbero f thesec ritiqueso f Rosicrucianismis not so mucht he
totals kepticismab outw hetherth erew as such a fraternitayt all as thed eep
disappointmentht atn one of its promisesh ad been fulfilledT. he composers
of the manifestot,h en,c oulldb e seen as genuineC hristiano ccultistsw ho
hopedf orw hatt heyc ould nota chieve;o r theyc ouldb e seen as fraudsw ho
had perpetratead practicalj oke, perhapsf org ain, perhapsf orf un. Either
way the resultw as disillusioninagn d could onlya rouse suspiciona bout the
whole process.
III
Yates observest hati n due course the Roscrucian" furore"d ied out, and
she has an explanationf or it. Part of her explanationc oncernsE ur-opean
historya nd the ThirtyY ears' War, on which I am not competentt o
pronounceb, uta notherp artc oncernst heg eneraln atureo f theo cculti n this
perioda nd the reactionsa gainsti t. In her earliere ssay on hermeticismin
sciences he wrotet hatt he Rosicrucian" tendst o have persecutionm ania.''8
Here she drops that objective account and claims, in effect,t hat the
Rosicrucian(w hoeverh e was-there seems a distincts hortageo f draimatis
I F. Yates, "The HenneticT raditionin RenaissanceS cience," inA rt.S ciencea nd
Historvi n the Renaissance,e d. C. Singleton(B altimore,1 967),p p. 255-74: quote
fromp . 263.
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
Review Article 299
personae) had everyr easont o feelp ersecuteds inceh e was in facth unted.
We have heardo f the conspiracyt heoryo f historyt; hisi s its firstc ousin,
the persecutiont heory.H ere again Yates's rhetoricc an be seen. She is
continuallpyo larizinga situationr, enderinigt as a violentc onflicti,m puting
anger,m alice,t o thep articipantsS.h e uses metaphords erivedf romw arst o
accountf or-dare one say, create?-an animusa gainstt hesef orceso f what
she calls enlightenmenItn. two successive sentencess he uses the word
"enemies" ("of them ovement"t')h reet imes-a mans ucha s Libaviusi s not
just a criticb ut an enemy( p. 51). and therea re other" enemies" (e.g., p.
57). Mersennem akes an "onslaught' on the Rosicruciansw, ritesv arious
"attacks" in which Casaubon's redatingo f the Hermetica to a post-
Christianp eriodb ecomes" a weapon" (p. 111). The Rosicrucianm ovement
suffereda "-totalc ollapse . . . witht he defeata t Praguei n 1620" which
"u shered in a greats atiricalc ampaign"a gainsti t, "the campaigno f the
conquerors"( 112). Such metaphorms ay seem merelys ignso f stalew riting,
butt heyh ave some seriousc onsequences.O ne is thatt hee motionso f stress
and combata re nourishedb y beingi ndulgeda nd resulti n a falsificatioonf
particularr eactions.T hus the sustainedc hallege to the pseudo-sciences
made by Mersennei s presentedi n violentt erms,a s if Mersennew ere a
totalitariacno ncernedw ithe xterminatiopno licies. He is supposedt o have
said that the occult sciences 'must be eliminatedr, oot and branch. . .
destroyed. . . severelyr epressed"( p. 112). To see how falset hatp ictureis
it is necessaryt o read Mersenne.
This giving-itno violencei s dangerousI. n a numbero f places Yates puts
side by side the Rosicrucianm ovemenatn d "witch-scares,w" hich,a ccord-
ing to her (usingT revor-Ropears an authorityw) ere growingin size and
ferocityd uringt he seventeenthce nturyA. s historianws ill say (have said),
thati nterpretatioofn t hew itch-scaries extremeldyo ubtfula,n d likes o much
else in Yates's book it deals witht he contraryar gumentbs y the simple
device of neverc onsideringth em.B ut it is the connectiono f all thisw ith
Rosicrucianismth at is especially disturbingC. hapter 8 is called "The
RosicrucianS care in France." In two worksp ublishedin Francei n 1623w e
finda llegationtsh att heR osicrucianasr e in leaguew itht hed evil( pp. 103f f.)
and are themselvews itches.T his is a familiarac cusationa gainstt he occult
sciences, notablya strologya, lchemy,a nd magic and has been heard in
everyp eriods ince Saint AugustineB. ut Yates arguest hatt hisi s peculiarly
fittintgo the mood of the 1620sa nd thatb otht hese pamphlet"s are really
workingu p a witch-crazea"g ainstt he RosicruciansT. his claimi s madef our
timeso n page 105; on the nextp age it is repeatedju st as oftena nd is linked
up to a Germanw itch-crazwe itht he suggestionth att hisw as all perhaps
parto f a conspiracyt o stampo ut "the Palatinate-Bohemimano vemenwt ith
its connectionws itht he Rosicrucianm anifestos."Y ates thena mplifietsh is
claim by examiningt he polemicso f Naude, and by the times he reaches
Mersennes he has createda pictureo f a countryp aralysedb y fear. Mer-
senne'sr eactionis said to be "'influencebdy fear' (pp. 112). Further':T he
failureo f the Rosicrucianm ovemenitn Germanyi,t s suppressionb yf irce
and by savagelya dversep ropaganda,a ffectedt he tone of thoughtin the
earlys eventeentche nturyi,n jectingin toi t an atmospheroef f ear' (p. 113; I
have italicizedt heg rosslyo verstatedem otiveg estures)T. he R. C. Brothers
"4coulde asily be turnedi nto sorcerersb y witch-hunter(sp' . 124). In the
".earliera nd moret erribltei mes' of the earlys eventeentche nturyr elations
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
300 Review Article
between secret societies "would have been deadly serious and full of
danger"( p. 217). The philosopherasb out to foundt he Royal Society' had
to be very careful. Religious passions were still high, and a dreaded
witch-scarme ights tarta t any momentt o stop theire fforts"(p p. 188-89).
One can onlyd eploret hisk indo f writingI.t worksi n mucht hes ame way
as the witch-crazeit self:i mputev iolence,o ppressiona nd persecutiont o
those who disagreew ith you and you more or less give yourselfc arte
blanchef ord ealingw itht hema s you will. Yates is always readyt o attack
witch-hunterbsu, t in the process she runs the same danger:w here the
witch-huntercrs eated witchest o fulfiltl he needed role, she is creating
witch-hunterIsf. we actuallyc ompare her account of Mersenneo r the
Royal Societyw ithh er dark hints( "the Societyh ad manye nemiesi n its
earliery ears; its religiousp ositions eemed unclear;w itch-scarews ere not
altogethear thingo f the past," p. 189) thenw e soon see wheret he truth
lies-the phantomfs ade away, daylighrt eturnsB. ut thisp ersecutionth eory
has another and perhaps even more serious consequence in that it
psychologiseasl l criticso f the movementI.n thisc limateo f fearn o one can
be allowed to criticizea n occult group because he has substantiaal nd
seriousi ntellectuaolb jectionst o its ideologyo r its methods.H e criticizesit
because he is afraido f it; or because he is afraidt hato therp eople willt hlink
he is a nmembeorf it; or becauiseh e is secretlya ttractedt o it.
JamesI publisheda book attackingm agic.I n Yates's worldt hish as to be
understoodas follows:" Jamesw as desperatelyaf raido f anythinsga vouring
of magic;t hisw as his mostd eep-seatedn eurosis.. . . Mersennet, oo, was
afraid.H e had to protecth is own interestin mathematicasn d mechanics
froma ny tainto f conjuringT. his gave an asperityt o his anti-Renaissance
movemen.t . ." (p. 113). This typeo f historiographisy p erniciousb ecause
it impliest hatt he critic'sr esponsew as not objectiveb ut personal,i nspired
by irrationaml otives,s o thath is judgmentcsa n be takenl ess seriously-in
fact,h e mayn otr eallvb e opposed to the movemenatt all. . . . Yates even
uses thisc riticaml odelt o accountf ort hem akeupo f the RoyalS ociety.T he
"Oxfordg roup," a numbero f scientistsw ho were among the founding
memberso f the Royal Society,a re said to have been actingt o dissociate
themselves' as completelya s possible fromi mputationof magic,s till a
dangerf or scientifigc roups" (p. 187). For this reason, she suggests,t hey
intensiftyh eirp raiseo f Bacon's experimentaml ethoda, nd "carefully"d lraw
away fromt he occult mathematicosf Dee and Fludd (ibid.). The evidence
for their association with this traditioni s too superficiatl o be worth
discussing.9N ow comes the proof:" The way was now preparedf or the
unleashingo f a witch-scare"(i bid.). This witch-scare-at ermi mplyingI,
take it, the active huntingd own and brutale xaminationof personst hought
to be witches-consistedin no morev iolente vent thant he publicationin
1659 by Meric Casaubon of Dee's own SpiritualD iary, recordingh is
"supposedc onversationws itha ngels." (Yates gives us no details of this
work,b ut it would seem thatD ee was the patheticv ictimo f an unscrupu-
lous imposture.C) asaubon's act in publishingth is book is now givent he
crudestp ersonali nterpretation'I:t appears that Casaubon had personal
9 Wilkinsi s supposed to have been "drawingq uite openly on the Dee-Fludd
traditiofno rh is worko n 'mathematicmal agic'" (187): Yates cannots ee thato ne can
borrowo ne idea froma man withoutt akinga ll the otherst oo.
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
Review Article 301
reasons for the publication, throughw hich he hoped to establish his own
orthodoxy . . ." (p. 188). First create a witch-scare, then find someone to
exploit it. Is this a fruitfuwl ay of writingh istory? Surely not.
The dramatizationa nd polarization of all the parties concerned creates an
image which does not correspond to reality. This is a technique which
defenderso f the occult have used before. An example close at hand is the
controversy between John Webster and Seth Ward which Miss Yates
discusses (pp. 185 ff.). In his attack on the Universities, Academiarimn
Exvamiien(i1 654), which includes an apologia for the hermetic tradition,
Webster denounces the "Schools" (i.e., Universities) for their attitude to
the occult: "that noble, and almost divine Science of naturalM agick, is by
them not only repudiated, abominated, and prosecuted with firea nd sword,
but also the very name seems nauseous and execrable unto them. .10
Webster was refuted, point by point, by Seth Ward (in his Vindicae
Academiariun [1654], who on this point simply called his opponent's bluff:
It is surelya wonderfutlh ingt, hatn aturaMl agicks houldn oto nlyb e prosecutedw ith
fire and sword, but that it should be execrable also. Yet notwithstandinthg is
lamentablep ersecutionI, dare adventurem y life,T hat M[r.] W. may passe safely
witht his Examen,c arryingit eitheri n his pocket,o r in his hand,o r in his mouth
throughb oth the Universitieso f this Nation, the severall Colledges of Eaton,
Wincheste&r c. the Collegeo f Physicianas t London,a nd all the rest,( providedh e
have a care how he passes by the College at Bethlem)w ithouta ny dangero f Bell,
Booke, or Candle, Fire, Sword or Execration."
Ward states that Webster's great authorities in magic are disregarded not
"because of the name of Magick, much less for any conjuringt hey teach,
but for the cheat and imposture which they put upon us," unlike the true
"natural magic' of science. He is willingt o give Webster the benefito f the
doubt as to whetherh e wrote maliciously,t o whip up feeling,o r just out of
ignorance: "But M. Webster knew not this, 'tis plaine thereforeh e is no
Witch, and is thereforef ree fromp ersecution.''12 That is a clear and relaxed
statemento f the tolerance to be expected in the 1650s: Miss Yates seems to
me to have seriously misjudged the intellectual climate in France and
England in the seventeenth century.
IV
Given the paucity of the evidence, it will by now be clear that Yates has set
herselfa very difficultt ask indeed: we only have two documents produced
by or for the Rosicrucians (whoever they were) and, as we have seen, much
contemporaryc omment expressed disappointmenta t the nonmaterialization
of either acts or persons. Yates does not seem daunted by the slenderness
of the evidence. But the reader who approaches her book as a serious
historicals tudy will be botheredb y the amount of sheer speculation in it, by
the uncriticalw ays in which the Rosicrucian movement is defined,a nd by
" JohnW ebsterA, cademiaruin E.xamen,p . 68. This and Seth Ward's replya re
reprintedin facsimileb y Allen G. Debus in his Science and Education in the
SeventeentlhC enturv. The Webster-WardD ebate (London, 1970), hereafterc ited as
SES. This quotationi s on p. 150.
" Seth Ward, Vindicae Academiaruni, p. 34; SES, p. 228.
12 Ibid.. p. 35; SES, p. 229.
This content downloaded from 139.184.014.150 on January 02, 2019 15:52:19 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
